The Magical Wish-Fulfilling Tree
A Prayer for the Long Life of His Holiness the Dalai Lama
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swasti
Oṃ svasti.
lha dang chepé drowa tadak gi
All living beings, even up to and including the gods,
shyab sen pemor tsuk gi norbü tü
Bow down and touch the crowns of their heads at your lotus feet.
pakpa jikten wangchuk trulpé ku
You who are a manifestation of the noble Lord of the World,
namdren gyalwé wangpor shyabten sol
Great guide, mighty conqueror, may your life remain secure.

chak na pekar changwé ö nang gi
With the radiant light of the Holder of the White Lotus,
dzamling ten dror pendé ngö kün jin
You bring benefit and happiness to the teachings and beings of this world,
paksam jön dang sampel norbu tar
And, as you spontaneously accomplish vast enlightened activity,
trinlé lhündrub chenpor shyabten sol
Like a magical wish-granting tree or wish-fulfilling jewel, may your life remain secure.

gang ku ser gyi riwo jiden shying
You whose form is as resplendent as a mountain of gold,
tsemé nam shyi bang rim ngönpar to
Lofty with the terraces of the four boundless qualities
chin druk du ngö rinchen changtrul dzé
And adorned with the pendants of the perfections and means of gathering—
ngawang lha yi lhar gyur shyabten sol
Lord of speech, deity of deities, may your life remain secure.

drachom nyewa khor gyi chöpa shyin
You whose conduct resembles that of the arhat Upāli;
changchub sem kyi dütsi chü kyi tam
You who are overflowing with the nectar of bodhicitta,
dorjé tekpé gyaltab tsemor dzek
And have reached the summit of the vajra vehicle's sovereign methods—
lobzang dorjé chang wang shyabten sol
Noble-minded Vajradhara, may your life remain secure.

chepé khewang jewé yiga trok
As through exposition, you enthral millions upon millions of learned scholars,
tsöpé loktok drakri nampar nyil
Through debate, you bring down the rocky mountains of wrong views,
tsompé tubten salwé chö dong trün
And through composition, you forge sacred monuments to illuminate the teachings—
tendzin gyatso kal gyar tenshyuk sol
Tenzin Gyatso, may your life remain secure for a hundred aeons.

sipa sum na drenda künpang shing
You who are entirely unrivalled throughout the three planes of existence,
dzamling chö kyi dakpor wanggyur chok
Supreme sovereign and master of Dharma in this world of Jambudvīpa,
tsungpa mepé chok lé namgyal dé
Perfectly and utterly victorious one beyond all compare,
shyabpé dorjé tri la tenshyuk sol
May your lotus feet remain secure upon the vajra throne, I pray.

Thus, in response to a request from all the Tibetan people of Gangtok, presented together with
the support of a silk scarf and maṇḍala by the Queen Mother and Yabzhi Punkhangpa, the
lowest among this great omniscient one's disciples, the one who holds the name of an incarnation
of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and is known as Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö Rimé Tenpé Gyaltsen
offered this prayer on an auspicious date, the seventh day of the eleventh month of the Fire
Bird year (28 December 1957). May it bring virtue and goodness!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "7gong sa chen por zhabs brtan du gsol ba dpag bsam
ljon shing /" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 3: 415–416