The Melody of the Nectar of Immortality
A Prayer for the Long Life of His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama, Supreme Victor and Omniscient
One
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om svasti
Oṃ svasti!
gyalwa kün gyi tsé chen yeshe ku
The vast love and primordial wisdom of the buddhas
chik tu düpa gangri tar karwa
All are embodied in Lokeśvara, white like a dazzling snow mountain,
pakchok jikten wangchuk trulpé ku
Sublime and holy Lord of the World. You who are his emanation,
kham sum drowé lama gyal gyur chik
A guru for each and every being in the three realms: may you be victorious!

sipa sum na ngotsar da mepa
Wondrous and without equal in the three worlds,
u dum wa ra tar pak tamché khyen
Omniscient and as unique as the uḍumbara flower,
dzamling ten dro yong kyi tsuk nor ché
Great crown jewel for the teachings and all beings on earth:
gyal chok chak na pemo shyabten sol
Supreme victorious one, Holder of the Lotus—I pray for your long life!

döné ngön sangye kyang tsöpé dü
Always and forever enlightened, yet in this age of conflict
dro nam chak gi yalgé nyer dzinpé
You gather living beings within your embrace,
tukkyé damcha dorjé tabur ten
Your resolve and your commitment unshakeable like a vajra:
sa chü wangchuk chenpo shyabten sol
Great lord on the tenth bhumi—I pray for your long life!

changchub lam gyi rimpé ngöntok kün
All the realizations of the stages of the path to enlightenment
sangwa sum dang yermé drepa lé
Are merged as one with your secret body, speech and mind,
khyen dang tsewé yönten sam mikhyab
Your qualities of knowledge and love inconceivable:
jangchok tubwang nyipar shyabten sol
Second buddha of the north—I pray for your long life!

ché tsö tsom la chaktok mi nga shying
Of teaching, debate and composition, your mastery is unimpaired,
pobpé terchen gyepo yongsu drol
In you the eight great treasures of brilliance have opened wide,
soso yangdak rigpé chö tönpa
With ‘specific perfect understanding’, you teach the Dharma:
chok lé namgyal chenpor shyabten sol
You who are victorious in every direction—I pray for your long life!

lo zang gyalwé tenpa rinpoche
Through your explanation, accomplishment and activity, you spread
shedrub lé kyi khorlö chok gyar pel
The enlightened Tsongkhapa’s precious teaching in a hundred directions,
gol ngen dü kyi langpö lepa gem
Annihilating the deluded arguments of malicious opponents,
jikdral mawé sengé shyabten sol
Fearless Lion of Speech, Mañjuśrī—I pray for your long life!

nang sum gyü sum sang ngak lam gyi rim
On the secret mantra’s gradual path of the triple vision and triple tantra,
wang shyi naljor zabmo drö shyi tim
As the four maṇḍalas are absorbed through the profound yogas of the four empowerments,
ku shyi yeshe ngönsum nyé dzepa
You realize directly the wisdom of the four kāyas:
khyabdak dorjé chang wang shyabten sol
All-pervading lord vajradhara—I pray for your long life!

ngöpo kün gyi neluk chakgya ché
Mahāmudrā is the natural state of all things,
zabsal nyisumepé lhenkyé kyi
Profound emptiness and clarity, indivisible:
yeshe nyimé sishyi münsel ba
With the sunlight of its innate wisdom you dispel the darkness of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa:
naljor wangchuk chenpor shyabten sol
Great lord of yogins, Milarepa—I pray for your long life!

gyüdé gyatsö sangwa kün gyi dzö
From the treasury of all the mysteries in the ocean of tantras
mindrol kha bab nam shyi gyün zangpo
You make the exquisite water of the four rivers that mature and liberate
kalzang duljé shyingsar dren dzepa
Flow into the fields of fortunate disciples:
sangwa dzinpé dakpor shyabten sol
Vajrapāṇi, Lord of Secrets—I pray for your long life!

khordé chö kün tendrel rolpar shar
Everything in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa occurs as the play of interdependence,
shar yang döné kyemé rabshyi ba
Arising yet primordially unborn, a state of utter peace:
tröpa kündral zabmo umé lam
Wise teacher of this profound Madhyamaka that is free from all conceptual elaboration,
tön khé lu yi wangpor shyabten sol
‘Lord of Nāgas’—Nāgārjuna—I pray for your long life!

chi nang shyen sum yermé dükhor lo
Kulika Pundarika, skilled and perfect exponent of the Kālacakra,
lekpar dom khé rikden pema kar
With its inseparable outer, inner and alternative cycles,
bhoté jong su geweshé su tön
Has appeared in the land of Tibet in the form of a spiritual friend:
dangpö sangye ngowor shyabten sol
You who are in essence the original buddha, Kālacakra—I pray for your long life!

khordé chö kün ösal tiklé long
All phenomena of samsara and nirvana are the expanse of the sphere of luminosity—
drigang mepa lhün gyi dzogpa ché
Unfluctuating, spontaneously Great Perfection:
jarmé rangdrol drebü gyalsa nyok
In self-liberation, beyond all action, you attain the kingdom of fruition,
kunzang dömé gönpor shyabten sol
Primordial lord Samantabhadra—I pray for your long life!

dorna tubten yongdzok shingta ché
Fearless, and without mixing or confusing them,
ma dré chak gi dren la nyengpadral
You steer onwards the great chariot of all the Buddha’s teachings;
ten dang drowa kün gyi kyab chikpu
Sole refuge for the teachings and for all beings:
tendzin gyatsö wangpor shyabten sol
Lord Tenzin Gyatso—I pray for your long life!

sipa sum gyi chegü tsuk nor gyi
A hundred times with reverence and awe,
gang gi shyabpé tashi khorlo la
The jewelled heads of the mighty ones of the three worlds,
gü shing dar ché len gyar tüpa yi
Bow to the auspicious wheels of your lotus feet:
chö kyi gyalpo chenpor shyabten sol
Great sovereign of Dharma—I pray for your long life!

lhamin dü dé tsarchö lha yi wang
As the lord of the gods, annihilating the demonic forces of the asuras
tutob nüpé dorjé tsé gyapé
With the hundred-pointed vajra of power, energy and strength,
ta ngen lokté drakri jom dzepa
Destroying the rocky mountains of wrong and perverted views,
jik dzé heruka pal shyabten sol
Fearsome Śrī Heruka—I pray for your long life!

sa dang lhünpo nyida né kyi bar
As long as this earth, Mount Meru, sun and moon endure,
sang sum shyendu gyurwa mepa yi
May you remain secure, invincible, on your vajra throne
dru dzin pakchok gyepé shyalmé khang
In the celestial mansion of Potala, Avalokiteśvara’s delight,
dorjé tri la shyomdral tenshyuk sol
Your secret body, speech and mind forever changeless!

chimé lha chok sum gyi jinlab dang
Through the grace of the three supreme deities of Long Life,
lama yidam sangye changsem kyi
And the power of the truth of masters, yidams, buddhas and bodhisattvas,
denpé tob kyi jitar solwé dön
May all that we have prayed for be blessed
gekmé drubpar jingyi lab tu sol
And so accomplished without any obstacle!

Paying reverence with his body, his speech and his mind, the one who bears the name of the incarnation
of Jamyang Khyentse, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö from the realm of Dokham in the east,
wrote this as he prayed with fervent devotion, at the Samdrup family house, to the south
of the great temple of Rasa Trulnang (the Jokhang), in Lhasa in Central Tibet. He then offered
this prayer to the great omniscient one himself. May it become a cause for his life to
be secure for countless aeons! Sarvadā kalyāṇaṃ suśreyo bhavatu: All is perfectly complete!

| Rigpa Translations, 2000. Based on the translation made by the late Khenpo Migmar Tsering,
Principal of Sakya College, and Dr. Peter Della Santina, to mark His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s
visit to Sakya College in November 1992.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rgyal mchog sku phreng bcu bzhi pa chen po'i zhabs
brtan gsol 'debs 'chi med dbyangs snyan/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum.
12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 3: 409–412